White HouseIn his second mix-up this week, Biden
talks about meeting with dead European leadersHe
referred to François Mitterrand, who died in 1996,
instead of French President Emmanuel Macron and
the late Helmut Kohl instead of former German
Chancellor Angela Merkel.President Joe Biden in
the State Dining Room of the White House on
Tuesday.Mandel Ngan / AFP - Getty ImagesPrintFeb.
8, 2024, 3:10 AM UTCBy Zoë RichardsPresident Joe
Biden on Wednesday twice referred to the late
German chancellor Helmut Kohl instead of former
Chancellor Angela Merkel while detailing a 2021
conversation at campaign events.It was the second
time this week that Biden had recalled speaking
with a European leader who had died years
earlier.Biden's gaffes Wednesday came at a series
of fundraisers in New York as he described
conversations he said he had with European leaders
at a meeting of the Group of Seven industrialized
nations in the U.K. in 2021, months after the Jan.
6 riot.Biden said at both events that "Helmut
Kohl," who died in 2017, had asked him how he
would respond if he read about people storming the
British Parliament and killing officers "to stop
the election of a prime minister." Merkel attended
the 2021 summit in the U.K.The White House didn't
immediately respond to a request for comment.The
remarks weren't Biden's first mix-up of European
leaders this week.Speaking at an event in North
Las Vegas, Nevada, on Sunday, Biden confused
François Mitterrand, the former French president
who died in 1996, for French President Emmanuel
Macron in retelling an encounter with the French
leader at a summit during his first year in
office.Biden's likely 2024 opponent, former
President Donald Trump, has also had recent slip-
ups.At a campaign rally last month, Trump railed
at length against GOP rival Nikki Haley, but he
appeared to have Rep. Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., on
his mind. Trump — who has accused Pelosi of
turning down 10,000 soldiers on Jan. 6, when she
was the House speaker, in a claim that has
been debunked — said at the rally that Haley was
in charge of security the day the Capitol was
attacked.Haley seized on Trump's gaffe,
questioning his mental fitness. In a campaign ad
last week, she criticized both Trump, 77, and
Biden, 81, about their ages, referring to them as
"grumpy old men."An NBC News poll conducted last
month found that 76% of voters, including half of
Democrats, say they have concerns about Biden’s
mental and physical health. The national poll also
found that 48% of voters have concerns about
Trump's mental and physical health.Zoë RichardsZoë
Richards is the evening politics reporter for NBC
News.Tara Prindiville contributed.