White HouseDemocrats blast special counsel Robert
Hur's Biden report as 'inappropriate' and
'politically motivated'Hur did not bring charges
against Biden for his handling of classified
documents but his report said the president on
several occasions failed to recall specific
dates.Get more newsLiveonPrintFeb. 9, 2024, 7:00
PM UTCBy Alexandra MarquezDemocrats on Friday
defended President Joe Biden and rebuked the
special counsel who investigated Biden's handling
of classified documents as a Republican prosecutor
with a political agenda.In his report, Robert Hur
declined to file charges against Biden for the way
he stored classified documents at his home and
personal office after he was vice president. But
Hur's report also said Biden presented himself in
interviews with investigators "as a sympathetic,
well-meaning, elderly man with a poor memory" and
noted several instances in which the president had
trouble recalling specific dates.Vice President
Kamala Harris on Friday told reporters at a gun
violence prevention event in Washington that the
report was "inaccurate and inappropriate.""The way
that the President’s demeanor in that report was
characterized could not be more wrong on the
facts," she said,  adding, “And clearly
politically motivated, gratuitous.”"That’s 350
pages to just say that Joe Biden isn’t going to be
indicted here, too. It was just a smear and cheap
shots and just taking things out of context, or
even just inventing," Sen. John Fetterman, D-Pa.,
told reporters on a Biden-Harris campaign call
about gun violence Friday."You don’t need 350
pages to say that ... so clearly there was an
agenda there," Fetterman added.While Hur does not
serve in a partisan capacity, he was appointed by
Trump in 2017 to serve as a U.S. attorney for the
District of Maryland. Before that, he worked in
the Justice Department during the Trump
administration as principal counselor to Deputy
Attorney General Rod Rosenstein.U.S. Attorney
Robert Hur, in Baltimore in 2019.Steve Ruark / AP
fileIan Sams, a spokesperson for the White House
Counsel's office, told reporters at the White
House on Friday that while the office agrees the
report is "gratuitous," he believes Hur may also
have felt pressure to take shots at Biden to make
up for not indicting him."When you are the first
special counsel in history, not to indict anybody,
there is pressure to criticize and to make, you
know, statements that maybe in otherwise you
wouldn't make," Sams said.While privately some
Democrats voiced concerns about how the
revelations in Hur's report would affect Biden's
re-election campaign, others publicly also offered
criticism of Hur.Jim Messina, who ran President
Barack Obama's 2012 re-election campaign, appeared
to respond directly to the "elderly man with a
poor memory" reference, which some Biden critics
seized on. "We’ve got to stop treating a single
line in a gratuitously long, heavily editorialized
special counsel’s report — in which no crime was
found btw — by a partisan Republican investigator
like it’s a bigger liability than Trump’s 91
criminal charges and being found liable for rape,"
Messina said in a post on X.Biden vigorously
defended his mental faculties in a defiant speech
Thursday evening. "My memory’s fine," he said.The
president also criticized Hur for including
characterizations about his memory in the
report."I know there’s some attention paid to some
language in the report about my recollection of
events. There’s even reference that I don’t
remember when my son died," Biden told
reporters.He added, "How in the hell dare he raise
that? Frankly, when I was asked the question, I
thought to myself, wasn’t any of their damn
business." Former Attorney General Eric Holder,
who served in the Obama administration, said in a
post on X that Hur's report "contains way too many
gratuitous remarks and is flatly inconsistent with
long standing [Department of Justice] traditions."
Rep. Daniel Goldman, of New York, who served as
the lead Democratic counsel in the first
impeachment of then-President Donald Trump, told
ABC News on Thursday, "What everyone will soon
realize is that this is a Republican special
counsel who completely went out of his way to
editorialize, to include material in his report
that is unnecessary and irrelevant to what he was
tasked with doing."He accused Hur of boosting
Republican efforts to "create a false equivalency
between President Biden and former President
Trump."Andrew Weissmann, former general counsel
for the FBI, told MSNBC Thursday that the
characterizations of Biden in the report are
"entirely inappropriate."He added, "That is not
the role of the Department of Justice ... to talk
about your memory today — irrelevant, it is
gratuitous. And it is also exactly what you're not
supposed to do, which is putting your thumb on the
scale that could have political repercussions."
Other Democrats simply downplayed the concerns
highlighted in the report, saying that Biden's
record should speak for itself.On Friday's
campaign call, Rep. Maxwell Frost, D-Fla., the
youngest member of Congress, said that voters
would be more focused on Biden's accomplishments
as president."No. 1, yes, OK, we know President
Biden is old. ... It doesn't sound like breaking
news to me," Frost told reporters. He added, "What
sounds like news to me is No. 1, 15 million jobs
being created, wages being up, inflation coming
down. That sounds like news — beating Big Pharma
and capping insulin at $35, the bipartisan
infrastructure law, the first-ever office of gun
violence prevention."Alexandra MarquezAlexandra
Marquez is a researcher for the political unit.