2024 ElectionCould Democrats replace Biden as
their nominee?It is nearly impossible for the
Democratic Party to replace Biden, and the
president has given no indication that he intends
to step aside — nor is anyone asking him
to.President Joe Biden, at a campaign event last
week in North Las Vegas. Stephanie Scarbrough /
APPrintFeb. 9, 2024, 10:01 PM UTC / Updated Feb.
9, 2024, 10:36 PM UTCBy Alex Seitz-Wald and Ben
KamisarWashington is abuzz with fresh concerns
about President Joe Biden’s fitness after a
special counsel report released Thursday raised
questions about his memory.But Democrats have
rallied around Biden and despite the fantasies of
some pundits and anxious Democrats, the president
is almost certain to be the Democratic Party’s
nominee as long as he wants.Both parties have
moved away from the era when insiders in
proverbial smoke-filled rooms could be kingmakers
at the national conventions, and Biden has
dominated every primary he’s competed in thus
far.No prominent Democrats have called for Biden
to step aside and there's no known serious
conservations about it.“The Democratic Party is
united in supporting President Biden, who will be
his party’s nominee this fall and will make Donald
Trump a loser a second time this November,” said
Biden campaign spokesperson Daniel Wessel in a
statement to NBC News.In the modern era, a
national party has never attempted to
adversarially replace their nominee in part
because they know it would likely fail. The issue
came before both parties in 2016, but neither took
such drastic action.The “Access Hollywood” tape
provoked some prominent Republican leaders to call
for ditching Donald Trump, but then-RNC Chairman
Reince Priebus said, “No such mechanisms
exists."Meanwhile, then-interim DNC Chair Donna
Brazile wrote in her memoir that she “nearly
replaced" Hillary Clinton after the candidate
collapsed during a Sept. 11 memorial service,
before ultimately concluding, “I could not make
good on my threat to replace her.”Still, the DNC
Charter does make provisions in case the party’s
nominee is incapacitated or opts to step aside,
and an anti-Biden coup at the convention is
theoretically possible, if highly unlikely. So how
would it work?Is it too late for another
Democratic candidate to get into the race?Only a
small handful of states have held Democratic
presidential primaries thus far. But there is
still not enough time for a new candidate to enter
the race and beat Biden outright. Filing deadlines
for about 80% of upcoming contests have already
passed and cannot be easily changed since they are
set in each state. There are not enough delegates
at stake in the remaining contests where ballot
access is still open to win a majority.Of course,
a Democrat could opt to run as a write-in
candidate (though not every state allows write-
ins). And Democratic Party rules can be changed.
As private organizations, the Democratic and
Republican National Committees are legally given a
wide berth over how they select their
nominees. But Biden essentially controls the
national party, as is standard practice for
whichever party controls the White House. Any
changes to the party’s nomination rules would go
through the DNC’s Rules and Bylaws Committee,
stacked with Biden allies, which essentially
rubber-stamped his controversial new 2024
presidential primary calendar putting South
Carolina ahead of New Hampshire, even though the
committee was not previously expecting to do that
until the night before the vote. What happens if
Biden drops out before the convention?Biden has
said he will remain in the race and there is no
indication otherwise, but the only plausible
scenario for Democrats to get a new nominee would
be for Biden to decide to withdraw. He could do so
while serving out the remainder of his term in the
White House, as Lyndon Johnson did in 1968. If
Biden were to drop out between now and August, it
would most likely create a free-for-all at the
Democratic National Convention in Chicago in
August.If Biden calls it quits before he wins the
majority of the Democratic delegates, it likely
wouldn't make a difference. Any new candidate who
tried to enter the race would be unlikely to get
on enough of the remaining ballots and therefore
couldn't win enough delegates. Ultimately the
decision would likely come down to the convention
delegates who were initially pledged to Biden.It
takes a majority of the roughly 4,000 pledged
delegates to win the party’s nomination. Under
recent reforms, the party’s more than 700
superdelegates — Democratic lawmakers and
dignitaries — are allowed to vote only if no one
wins a majority of pledged delegates on the first
ballot, so their votes could be crucial in a
contested convention. Biden would have some
influence over the pledged delegates he won
through the primaries, but ultimately, they can
vote as they please.His long-shot primary
challengers, Rep. Dean Phillips, D-Minn., and
self-help author Marrianne Williamson, who
suspended her campaign this week, have won no
delegates so far. And simply having run won't mean
that they move to the front of the list in the
event of a vacancy. Could Democrats replace Biden
against his will?There’s no evidence the party
would entertain a change without Biden’s consent.
But even if they did, there is no mechanism for
the national party to replace a candidate before
the convention and certainly no way for them to
anoint a chosen successor.If large swaths of the
Democratic Party lost faith in Biden, delegates to
the national convention could theoretically defect
en masse. Of course, they were chosen to be
delegates because of their loyalty to Biden and
have pledged to support him at the convention.But,
unlike many Republican delegates, Democratic
delegates are not technically bound to their
candidate. DNC rules allow delegates to “in all
good conscience reflect the sentiments of those
who elected them,” providing some wiggle room.The
party’s charter does contain provisions to replace
the nominee in the event of a vacancy. The measure
is intended to be used in case of death,
resignation or incapacitation, not to replace
someone who has no desire to step down.That was
the measure Brazile considered invoking after
Clinton collapsed two months before the 2016
election.In her memoir, released a year later,
Brazile wrote that she was worried “not just about
Hillary’s health but about her anemic campaign ...
so lacking in the spirit of fight.” “Perhaps
changing the candidate was a chance to win this
thing, to change the playing field in a way that
would send Donald Trump scrambling and unable to
catch up,” she wrote, adding that aides to other
would-be candidates contacted her, including chief
of staff to then-Vice President Biden. But after
less than 24 hours of consideration, Brazile
realized the idea was untenable without Clinton’s
cooperation and likely to only divide her
party.Current DNC Chair Jaime Harrison is a
longtime Biden ally who serves, essentially, at
the pleasure of the president. And the national
party has certainly given no indication it's
anything but fully behind the president’s re-
election.  What happens if Biden withdraws after
the convention?To fill a vacancy on the national
ticket, the DNC chair can call a “special meeting”
of the full Democratic National Committee, which
includes about 500 members. On paper, at least,
all it takes is a majority vote of those present
to pick a new presidential and vice presidential
nominee. But that process would likely be anything
but smooth, and be filled with behind-the-scenes
jockeying and public pressure campaigns. If a
vacancy were to occur close to the November
election, however, it could raise constitutional,
legal and practical concerns. Among other issues,
ballots have to be printed well in advance of the
election and may not be able to be changed in
time.Would Kamala Harris replace Biden?If Biden
were to relinquish the presidency, Vice President
Kamala Harris would automatically become president
— but not the Democratic Party’s nominee. Nor
would she necessarily be the nominee if Biden
withdrew from his re-election bid while remaining
in the White House.She might be politically
favored, but party rules give the vice president
no major mechanical benefit over other
candidates. Biden’s delegates would not
automatically transfer to Harris and the
convention holds separate votes on nominees for
president and vice president. So she would still
need to win a majority of delegates at the
convention. If the top of the ticket was vacated
after the convention, she would still need to win
a majority of votes at the special meeting of the
DNC.That is all, at least, under current party
rules. But a vacancy at the top of the ticket is
the kind of dramatic moment that might lead party
leaders to revisit them in the name of easing the
transition. Harris has some close allies in key
places at the DNC, including the co-chair of the
party’s Rules and Bylaws Committee. But nothing
would likely happen without a fight.Alex Seitz-
WaldAlex Seitz-Wald is a senior politics reporter
for NBC News.Ben KamisarBen Kamisar is a deputy
political editor in NBC's Political
Unit. Alexandra Marquez, Bridget Bowman and Jack
Pedigo contributed.