Article Title: ‘A nightmare’: Special counsel’s assessment of Biden’s mental fitness triggers Democratic panic

2024 Election‘A nightmare’: Special counsel’s assessment of Biden’s mental
fitness triggers Democratic panicPolls have long found that questions about his
age and mental abilities have plagued Biden’s standing with the public.Get more
newsLiveonPrintFeb. 8, 2024, 11:28 PM UTC / Updated Feb. 9, 2024, 1:56 AM UTCBy
Peter NicholasWASHINGTON — President Joe Biden sidestepped any criminal charges
as the investigation into his handling of classified documents concluded, but
the political blowback from the special counsel’s report Thursday could prove
even more devastating, reinforcing impressions that he is too old and impaired
to hold the highest office.Special counsel Robert Hur’s portrait of a man who
couldn’t remember when he served as Barack Obama’s vice president, or the year
when his beloved son Beau died, dealt a blow to Biden’s argument that he is
still sharp and fit enough to serve another four-year term.In deciding not to
charge Biden with any crimes, the special counsel wrote that in a potential
trial, “Mr. Biden would likely present himself to a jury, as he did during our
interview with him, as a sympathetic, well-meaning, elderly man with a poor
memory.”It was tough enough for Biden to reassure voters about his health before
Hur’s report hit like a thunderclap Thursday afternoon, prompting members of his
own party to question whether he could remain the nominee in November.“It’s a
nightmare,” said a Democratic House member who asked to speak anonymously to
provide a frank assessment, adding that “it weakens President Biden electorally,
and Donald Trump would be a disaster and an authoritarian.”“For Democrats, we’re
in a grim situation.”Biden wasted little time before attempting to minimize the
fallout. He held an unexpected exchange with reporters in the White House on
Thursday night, in which he disputed Hur's assessment of his mental acuity.Biden
grew emotional when invoking the part of the report addressing the date of his
son's death. "How in the hell dare you raise that?" Biden said. "Frankly, when I
was asked the question I thought to myself, 'It wasn't any of their damn
business.' "‘Beyond devastating’Polling has long shown that age looms as Biden’s
greatest liability in his expected rematch with Trump. A January poll by NBC
News found that 76% of voters have major or moderate concerns about Biden’s
mental and physical health.“It’s been a problem since way before this ever
happened,” said a longtime Democratic operative who noted that when focus groups
are asked to apply one word to Biden, it is often “old.”Just this week, Biden
twice referred to conversations he’s had as president with foreign leaders
who’ve long since died. In his remarks Thursday night defending his competency,
while talking about the war in Gaza, he referred to Egyptian President Abdel
Fattah el-Sissi as being the head of Mexico. White House press aides have
downplayed such lapses as the sort of mistake anyone in public life can make.The
Hur report strips away the defenses that Biden’s press operation has used to
protect him and raises fresh doubts about whether Biden is up to the rigors of
the presidency, Democratic strategists said in interviews.“This is beyond
devastating,” said another Democratic operative, speaking on condition of
anonymity to talk candidly about Biden’s shortcomings. “It confirms every doubt
and concern that voters have. If the only reason they didn’t charge him is
because he’s too old to be charged, then how can he be president of the United
States?”Asked if Hur’s report changes the calculus for Democrats who expect
Biden to be the party’s nominee, this person said: “How the f--- does it
not?”Another Biden ally called it “the worst day of his presidency.”“I think he
needs to show us this is a demonstrably false characterization of him and that
he has what it takes to win and govern.”Biden has overwhelmingly won the first
primary contests — notching victories in New Hampshire, South Carolina and
Nevada. It would be virtually impossible for anyone else to challenge him at
this point; the deadline has passed in more than 30 states to get on primary
ballots.Some of the president’s allies were quick to defend him. They pointed to
the timing of the interview with the special counsel — days after Hamas’ attack
on Israel, which had captured much of the president’s focus. Others said that in
their own dealings with Biden, he shows no sign of infirmity.“He did so well in
this discussion with members,” Rep. Susan Wild, D-Pa., told NBC News after
seeing the president on Thursday. “He’s very sharp, no memory issues, and his
only stumbling is when he trips over words consistent with his lifelong speech
impediment.”‘Prejudicial language’Though Biden was fortunate to escape
indictment, the special counsel report may give Trump additional fodder as he
fights charges for allegedly mishandling classified records at his Mar-a-Lago
social club. Republicans are already accusing Biden of benefiting from a double
standard. Trump will likely brandish the Hur report as proof that Biden has
“weaponized” the Justice Department for political advantage.What’s more,
Democrats will now be hard-pressed to capitalize on Trump’s indictment over
retaining classified records. Before Hur’s report came out, Democrats argued
that the two cases were very different. Whereas Trump failed to turn over
classified records even after he was asked to do so, Biden willingly cooperated
with authorities and relinquished all the material he had, Biden allies had
argued.“The public understands the essential difference between presidents or
vice presidents like Joe Biden who occasionally behaved in sloppy ways with
respect to where they were taking documents, and a president like Trump, who
deliberately makes off with hundreds of classified government documents and then
hides them and refuses to return them,” Rep. Jamie Raskin, D-Md., said on
Wednesday, before the report was released. (Trump has denied any
wrongdoing.)Now, the distinctions may be harder for Biden allies to draw, given
that Hur wrote that there was evidence Biden “willfully retained and disclosed
classified material after his vice presidency when he was a private citizen.”The
report mentions an instance in February 2017, when he was no longer vice
president, when Biden read notes containing classified information “nearly
verbatim” to a ghostwriter helping him with his book, “Promise Me, Dad.”Storage
of sensitive government secrets was haphazard. The report describes certain
classified records involving the war in Afghanistan  in Biden’s Delaware garage
inside a “badly damaged box surrounded by household detritus.”Before the report
was released, Biden aides had been bracing for a finding that he had simply been
careless in his treatment of classified records, a person familiar with the
White House’s thinking said.The political fallout from the report, though, is
likely to be “worse,” this person said. What will stick in people’s minds is
what Hur said about Biden’s memory, the person added.Biden’s lawyers disputed
the report’s description of Biden’s forgetfulness.“We do not believe that the
report’s treatment of President Biden’s memory is accurate or appropriate,” two
of his lawyers wrote in a letter to Hur. “The report uses highly prejudicial
language to describe a commonplace occurrence among witnesses: a lack of recall
of years-old events.”In the hours after the report was released, people close to
the Biden campaign rolled out a different rebuttal. Jim Messina, who ran Obama’s
2012 re-election campaign, wrote on X, the site formerly known as Twitter, that
Hur is a Republican who “knew exactly how his swipes could hurt Biden
politically.”That’s a familiar argument. Trump has also claimed that law
enforcement is trying to sway the election, meaning both sides are now claiming
victimization at the hands of partisan prosecutors.“Hur knew exactly what he was
doing here,” Stephanie Cutter, a veteran Democratic operative, wrote on X. “To
provide political cover for himself for not prosecuting, he gratuitously leveled
a personal (not legal) charge against the president that he absolutely knows is
a gift to Trump. And, guess what we are all talking about?”Peter NicholasPeter
Nicholas is a senior national political reporter for NBC News.Jonathan Allen,
Monica Alba, Katherine Doyle, Mark Murray  and Scott Wong contributed.